# Page-oriented Storage Engines

The most widely used indexing structure is quite different: the B-Tree. They remain the standard index implementation in almost all relational databases, and _many nonrelational databases use them too_.

## Design Philosophy

Like SSTables, B-trees keep key-value pairs sorted by key, which allows efficient keyvalue lookups and range queries. B-trees break the database down into fixed-size blocks or pages, traditionally 4 KB in size (sometimes bigger), and read or write one page at a time. This design corresponds more closely to the underlying hardware, as disks are also arranged in fixed-size blocks.

## Working

One page is designated as the root of the B-tree; Each child is responsible for a continuous range of keys, and the keys between the references indicate where the boundaries between those ranges lie. Eventually we get down to a page containing individual keys (a leaf page), which either contains the value for each key inline or contains references to the pages where the values can be found.

The number of references to child pages in one page of the B-tree is called the **_branching factor_**.

If there isn’t enough free space in the page to accommodate the new key, it is split into two half-full pages, and the parent page is updated to account for the new subdivision of key ranges. This algorithm ensures that the tree remains balanced: a B-tree with n keys always
has a depth of O(log n). A four-level tree of 4 KB pages with a branching factor of 500 can store up to 256 TB.

## Making B-trees reliable

In order to make the database resilient to crashes, it is common for B-tree implementations to include an additional data structure on disk: a write-ahead log (WAL, also known as a redo log). This is an append-only file to which every B-tree modification must be written before it can be applied to the pages of the tree itself. When the database comes back up after a crash, this log is used to restore the B-tree back to a consistent state.

An additional complication of updating pages in place is that careful concurrency control is required if multiple threads are going to access the B-tree at the same time - otherwise a thread may see the tree in an inconsistent state. This is typically done by protecting the tree’s data structures with latches (lightweight locks).
